README.md, before:

# Melange documentation site

This repository contains the source for Melange public documentation site.

If you are looking for Melange source instead, it can be found in
https://github.com/melange-re/melange.

> **Warning** At the moment, this is a **work in progress**, opened to the
> public. The content and technology used to build the website are being
> developed and the website itself is not hosted yet on its final domain.

## Working locally

After cloning the repository, install the necessary Python packages:

```
python3 -m pip install -r ./pip-requirements.txt
```

Then run `mkdocs serve .` from the folder where the repository lives.

### (Optional) Tooling for docs generation

Optionally, to run some of the tools to auto-generate parts of the
documentation, you will need an opam switch with the required dependencies. To
set it up, run:

```
make init
```

## Writing code snippets

All code snippets should be written in OCaml syntax. A development-time script
is available to automatically generate Reason syntax snippets from the OCaml
ones. Before running this script, you will need to set up an opam switch.
Instructions can be found in the ["Tooling for docs
generation"](#optional-tooling-for-docs-generation) section.

To run the script:

```
dune build @re
```

To promote any changes to the original `md` file, one can run:

```
dune build @re --auto-promote
```

## Publishing

Publishing is done automatically from GitHub actions:
- Every commit to `master` will publish in the `unstable` folder
- Every tag pushed with the `v*` format will publish on its corresponding
  folder, and set it as default

### Tracking new versions of `melange` in opam

When a new version of `melange` is published in opam, a new release of the docs
and playground should be published. The process is as follows:

- Update `documentation-site.opam` to point `melange` and `melange-playground`
  packages to the commit of the new release (they need to be pinned so that the
  Melange docs can be accessed on a stable path)
- Update versions of the compiler listed in the playground (`app.jsx`)
- In the docs markdown pages, grep for the last version of Melange that was used
  and replace it with the newer one.
- Open a PR with the changes above
- After merging the PR, create a new branch `x.x.x-patches`. This branch will be
  used to publish any patches or improvements to that version of the docs /
  playground
- In that branch, add a new command on the main `Makefile` to publish a new tag,
  e.g.
```Makefile
.PHONY: move-vx.x.x-tag
move-vx.x.x-tag: ## Moves the vx.x.x tag to the latest commit, useful to publish the vx docs
	git push origin :refs/tags/vx.x.x
	git tag -fa vx.x.x
	git push origin --tags
```
- Call the newly created command to create a new version selectable from the
  website: `make move-vx.x.x-tag`
- Once the new version is published, we need to make sure other versions remain
  SEO friendly:
  - In `master`: update `add_canonical` to point to the new `vx.x.x`, so that
    the `unstable` version of the docs starts referring to that version as the
    canonical one. To do so:
      - update the version in `add_canonical.ml`
      - run `dune test --auto-promote`
  - In `y.y.y-patches`: update `add_canonical` in version `y.y.y` that was last
    before, to point to `vx.x.x` as well. To do so:
      - update the version in `add_canonical.ml`
      - run `dune test --auto-promote`
      - uncomment the relevant code in `publish-version.yml`
- Finally, we need to disable the publication of previous version `y.y.y` as the
  default version:
  - In `y.y.y-patches`: update `publish-version.yml` so that `mike deploy -push`
    is used and `set-default` is removed. The diff should look like:
    ```diff
    +      - run: mike deploy --push ${{  github.ref_name }}
    -      - run: mike deploy ${{  github.ref_name }}
    -      - run: mike set-default --push ${{  github.ref_name }}
    ```

  - Commit and run `make move-vy.y.y-tag` to deploy.

Commit message:

Migrate from mkdocs to vitepress (#161)
* add vitepress

* vitepress: fix docs:build

* vitepress: add syntax toggle

* vitepress: add missing sidebar items

* vitepress: add reason syntax highlight

* vitepress: add sitemap and search

* vitepress: handle api docs

* vitepress: deploy to unstable

* vitepress: fix playground link

* vitepress: attempt to fix deploy

* vitepress: debug + more attempts

* vitepress: try to fix playground

* vitepress: fix mobile layout

* vitepress: test _self with api links

* vitepress: change outline level

* vitepress: add target self for api links

* vitepress: add edit on github

* vitepress: fix reason snippets top margin

* vitepress: cleanup python + fix publish version

README.md, after:

# Melange documentation site

This repository contains the source for Melange public documentation site.

If you are looking for Melange source instead, it can be found in
https://github.com/melange-re/melange.

> **Warning** At the moment, this is a **work in progress**, opened to the
> public. The content and technology used to build the website are being
> developed and the website itself is not hosted yet on its final domain.

## Working locally

After cloning the repository, install the necessary JavaScript packages:

```
yarn
```

Then run `yarn docs:dev` from the folder where the repository lives.

### (Optional) Tooling for docs generation

Optionally, to run some of the tools to auto-generate parts of the
documentation, you will need an opam switch with the required dependencies. To
set it up, run:

```
make init
```

## Writing code snippets

All code snippets should be written in OCaml syntax. A development-time script
is available to automatically generate Reason syntax snippets from the OCaml
ones. Before running this script, you will need to set up an opam switch.
Instructions can be found in the ["Tooling for docs
generation"](#optional-tooling-for-docs-generation) section.

To run the script:

```
dune build @re
```

To promote any changes to the original `md` file, one can run:

```
dune build @re --auto-promote
```

## Publishing

Publishing is done automatically from GitHub actions:
- Every commit to `master` will publish in the `unstable` folder
- Every tag pushed with the `v*` format will publish on its corresponding folder

### Tracking new versions of `melange` in opam

When a new version of `melange` is published in opam, a new release of the docs
and playground should be published. The process is as follows:

- Update `documentation-site.opam` to point `melange` and `melange-playground`
  packages to the commit of the new release (they need to be pinned so that the
  Melange docs can be accessed on a stable path)
- Update versions of the compiler listed in the playground (`app.jsx`)
- In the docs markdown pages, grep for the last version of Melange that was used
  and replace it with the newer one.
- Open a PR with the changes above
- After merging the PR, create a new branch `x.x.x-patches`. This branch will be
  used to publish any patches or improvements to that version of the docs /
  playground
- In that branch, add a new command on the main `Makefile` to publish a new tag,
  e.g.
```Makefile
.PHONY: move-vx.x.x-tag
move-vx.x.x-tag: ## Moves the vx.x.x tag to the latest commit, useful to publish the vx docs
	git push origin :refs/tags/vx.x.x
	git tag -fa vx.x.x
	git push origin --tags
```
- Call the newly created command to create a new version selectable from the
  website: `make move-vx.x.x-tag`
- Once the new version is published, we need to make sure other versions remain
  SEO friendly:
  - In `master`: update `add_canonical` to point to the new `vx.x.x`, so that
    the `unstable` version of the docs starts referring to that version as the
    canonical one. To do so:
      - update the version in `add_canonical.ml`
      - run `dune test --auto-promote`
  - In `y.y.y-patches`: update `add_canonical` in version `y.y.y` that was last
    before, to point to `vx.x.x` as well. To do so:
      - update the version in `add_canonical.ml`
      - run `dune test --auto-promote`
      - uncomment the relevant code in `publish-version.yml`
- In the `gh-pages` branch, replace the default version with the new one [in
  index.html](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/blob/gh-pages/index.html#L10)
