docs/melange-book/celsius-converter-exception.md, before:

# Celsius Converter

This time, we'll create a widget that takes a temperature value in Celsius and
converts it to Fahrenheit. Create a new file called `CelsiusConverter.re`:

```reasonml
let convert = celsius => 9.0 /. 5.0 *. celsius +. 32.0;

[@react.component]
let make = () => {
  let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");

  <div>
    <input
      value=celsius
      onChange={evt => {
        let newCelsius = ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
        setCelsius(_ => newCelsius);
      }}
    />
    {React.string({js|°C = |js})}
    {React.string({js|? °F|js})}
  </div>;
};
```

Inside the `input`'s `onChange` handler, we get the event target using
`ReactEvent.Form.target`, which has the type `ReactEvent.Form.t => {.. }`. What
is `{.. }`? It's an object whose fields aren't well-defined (is there a specific
term for this?), pretty much the same as a JavaScript object. In OCaml, we use
`##` operator to access fields on an object. Be careful when using objects, as
it subverts OCaml's type system. We could write
`ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value + 1`, treating it as if it were an integer,
and we wouldn't get a compilation error.

It's a good idea to put functions that return objects into type-annotated helper
functions. For example:

<!--#prelude#
let evt: ReactEvent.Form.t = [%mel.raw "null"];
-->
```reasonml
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;

// Call it like this:
let newValue = getValueFromEvent(evt);
```

The `: string` after the argument list tells the compiler that this function
must return a `string`. Using `getValueFromEvent` ensures that the `value` field
can't be used as anything other than a string.

Another thing to note about `onChange` is that after the `evt` argument, the
body of the callback function is surrounded by braces (`{}`). OCaml functions are
like JavaScript's arrow functions--if they contain more than one line, they need
to be enclosed by braces.

Let's change the render logic to update the Fahrenheit display:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float |> React.string}
```

The pipe last operator (`|>`) is very handy here, allowing us to convert a
string to float, then convert that float to another float (Celsius ->
Fahrenheit), convert back to string, and finally convert the string to
`React.element`, all in one line.

We should probably put °F after the Fahrenheit value so that it's clear to the
user what unit of measure they're seeing. We can do so using the string
concatenation operator (`++`):

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) ++ {js| °F|js} |> React.string}
```

However, there's a bug in this code: it will crash if you enter anything into
the input that can't be converted to a float. We can remedy this by catching the
exception using a `switch` expression:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
  switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
  | exception _ => "error"
  | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
  }
)
|> React.string}
```

The `| exception _` branch will execute if there is any exception. The
underscore (`_`) is a wildcard, meaning it will match any exception. If we
wanted to be specific about which exception we want to catch, we could instead
write

```
| exception (Failure(_)) => "error"
```

Right now it correctly renders "error" when you enter an invalid value, but it
also renders "error" if the input is blank. It might be bit more user-friendly
to instead show "? °F" like before. We can do that by wrapping the switch
expression in a ternary expression:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
    celsius == ""
      ? {js|? °F|js}
      : (
        switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
        | exception _ => "error"
        | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
        }
      )
  )
  |> React.string}
```

The ternary expression (`condition ? a : b`) works the same as in JavaScript.
But in OCaml, it's also shorthand for an if-else expression (`if (condition) {
a; } else { b; }`). So we could rewrite it as this:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
  if (celsius == "") {
    {js|? °F|js};
  } else {
    switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
    | exception _ => "error"
    | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
    };
  }
)
|> React.string}
```

Unlike in JavaScript, the if-else construct is an expression and always yields a
value. Both branches must return a value of the same type or you'll get a
compilation error. In practice, if-else expressions aren't very common in OCaml
code because in simple cases you can use ternary, and in more complex cases you
can use switch. But it's a nice, familiar fallback you can rely on when you
haven't quite gotten used to OCaml syntax yet.

If we enter a value with a lot of decimals in it, e.g. `21.1223456`, we'll
get a Fahrenheit value with a lot of decimals in it as well. We can limit the
number of decimals in the converted value using
[Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Float/index.html#val-toFixedWithPrecision):

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert) {
| exception _ => "error"
| fahrenheit => Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(fahrenheit, ~digits=2) ++ {js| °F|js}
};
```

`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision` is a function that has one positional argument
and one [labeled argument](../communicate-with-javascript.md#labeled-arguments).
In this case, the labeled argument is named `digits` and it's receiving a value
of `2`. It's not possible to pass in the value of a labeled argument without
using the `~label=value` syntax. We'll see more of labeled arguments in the
following chapters when we introduce props (todo).

You might have noticed that the function chain feeding the switch expression got
a bit shorter, from

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float
```

to

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
celsius |> float_of_string |> convert
```

This happened because `string_of_float`, which takes a single argument, was
replaced by `Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision`, which takes two arguments, and
functions chained using `|>` can only take a single argument. But this
one-argument restriction actually doesn't prevent us from putting
`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision` in the chain! We can take advantage of OCaml's
[partial
application](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/function#partial-application)
feature to create a one-argument function by writing
`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(~digits=2)`. Then our switch expression becomes

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(~digits=2)) {
| exception _ => "error"
| fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
}
```

We have a working component now, but catching exceptions isn't The OCaml Way! In
the next chapter, you'll see how to rewrite the logic using `option`.

## Exercises

<b>1.</b> Try changing `{js|°C = |js}` to `"°C = "`. What happens?

<b>2.</b> It's possible to rewrite the `onChange` callback so that it contains a
single expression:

<!--#prelude#
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
<input value=celsius onChange={evt => setCelsius(_ => getValueFromEvent(evt))} />
```

This compiles, but it now contains a hidden bug. Do you know what silent error
might occur?

<b>3.</b> It's possible to use partial application with most functions in OCaml,
even operators. Take a look at the following program:

```reasonml
let addFive = (+)(5);
Js.log(addFive(2));
Js.log(addFive(7));
Js.log(addFive(10));
```

What do you think it outputs? Run it in [Melange
Playground](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground) to confirm your hypothesis.

<b>4.</b> Use the pipe last operator (`|>`) and partial application to write a
function that takes an integer
argument `x`, subtracts `x` from 10, and converts that result to binary. Hint:
Use the
[Js.Int.toStringWithRadix](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Int/#val-toStringWithRadix)
function.

## Overview

- Objects (`{.. }`) can have fields of any name and type.
  - You access fields of an object using the `##` operator.
  - You can use type annotations to make the use of objects safer.
- Concatenate strings using the `++` operator.
- Switch expressions can be used to catch exceptions.
- Ternary expressions are shorthand for if-else expressions.
- The two branches of if-else expressions must return values of the same type.
- Besides positional arguments, OCaml functions can also have labeled arguments.
- If a function takes two arguments, we can supply one of them and get a
  function that takes only one argument. This is called partial application.

## Solutions

<b>1.</b> Changing it to `"°C = "` will result in a bit of gibberish being rendered:
"Â°C". We can't rely on OCaml strings to [deal with Unicode
correctly](../communicate-with-javascript.md#strings), so any string that
doesn't contain only ASCII text must be delimited using `{js||js}`.

<b>2.</b> Rewriting `onChange` the handler to use a single expression creates a
potential problem with stale values coming from the event object:

<!--#prelude#
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
<input value=celsius onChange={evt => setCelsius(_ => getValueFromEvent(evt))} />
```

Inside of `onChange`, we can expect the function `getValueFromEvent(evt)` to
return the latest value of the `input`. However, we are now calling
`getValueFromEvent(evt)` from a different function--the callback we pass to
`setCelsius`! By the time that `setCelsius`'s callback is invoked, the `evt`
object might have been recycled and no longer have the same value as when
`onChange` was initially invoked. For more details about this, see [Using Event
Values with
useState](https://reasonml.github.io/reason-react/docs/en/usestate-event-value)
in the [ReasonReact](https://reasonml.github.io/reason-react/) docs.

<b>3.</b> [Define an addFive function using partial application](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground/?language=Reason&code=bGV0IGFkZEZpdmUgPSAoKykoNSk7CkpzLmxvZyhhZGRGaXZlKDIpKTsKSnMubG9nKGFkZEZpdmUoNykpOwpKcy5sb2coYWRkRml2ZSgxMCkpOw%3D%3D&live=off)

<b>4.</b> [Define a function that subtracts from 10 and converts to binary](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground/?language=Reason&code=bGV0IGNvb2xGdW5jdGlvbiA9IHggPT4geCB8PiAoKC0pKDEwKSkgfD4gSnMuSW50LnRvU3RyaW5nV2l0aFJhZGl4KH5yYWRpeD0yKTsKSnMubG9nKGNvb2xGdW5jdGlvbigxKSk7CkpzLmxvZyhjb29sRnVuY3Rpb24oNSkpOw%3D%3D&live=off)

-----

[Source code for this
chapter](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/develop/src/celsius-converter-exception/)
can be found in the [Melange for React Developers
repo](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs).

Commit message:

Improve section on polymorphic objects

docs/melange-book/celsius-converter-exception.md, after:

# Celsius Converter

Our second widget will be one that takes a temperature value in Celsius and
converts it to Fahrenheit. Create a new file in `src` called
`CelsiusConverter.re`:

```reasonml
let convert = celsius => 9.0 /. 5.0 *. celsius +. 32.0;

[@react.component]
let make = () => {
  let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");

  <div>
    <input
      value=celsius
      onChange={evt => {
        let newCelsius = ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
        setCelsius(_ => newCelsius);
      }}
    />
    {React.string({js|°C = |js})}
    {React.string({js|? °F|js})}
  </div>;
};
```

Inside the `input`'s `onChange` handler, we get the event target using
`ReactEvent.Form.target`, which has the type `ReactEvent.Form.t => {_.. }`. What
is `{_.. }`? It's shorthand for a [Js.t
object](../communicate-with-javascript.md#using-jst-objects), a polymorphic
object whose fields aren't well-defined. In OCaml, we use the `##` operator to
access fields on an object. Be careful when using objects, as it subverts
OCaml's type system. We could write `ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value + 1`,
treating it as if it were an integer, and the compiler wouldn't complain.

It's a good idea to put functions that return objects into type-annotated helper
functions. For example:

<!--#prelude#
let evt: ReactEvent.Form.t = [%mel.raw "null"];
-->
```reasonml
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;

// Call it like this:
let newValue = getValueFromEvent(evt);
```

The `: string` after the argument list tells the compiler that this function
must return a `string`. Using the `getValueFromEvent` function ensures that the
`value` field can't be used as anything other than a string.

Another thing to note about `onChange` is that after the `evt` argument, the
body of the callback function is surrounded by braces (`{}`). OCaml functions
are like JavaScript's arrow functions---if they contain more than one line, they
need to be enclosed by braces.

Let's change the render logic to update the Fahrenheit display:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float |> React.string}
```

The pipe last operator (`|>`) is very handy here, allowing us to convert a
string to float, then convert that float to another float (Celsius ->
Fahrenheit), convert back to string, and finally convert the string to
`React.element`, all in one line.

We should probably put °F after the Fahrenheit value so that it's clear to the
user what unit of measure they're seeing. We can do so using the string
concatenation operator (`++`):

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) ++ {js| °F|js} |> React.string}
```

However, there's a bug in this code: it will crash if you enter anything into
the input that can't be converted to a float. We can remedy this by catching the
exception using a `switch` expression:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
  switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
  | exception _ => "error"
  | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
  }
)
|> React.string}
```

The `| exception _` branch will execute if there is any exception. The
underscore (`_`) is a wildcard, meaning it will match any exception. If we
wanted to be specific about which exception we want to catch, we could instead
write

```
| exception (Failure(_)) => "error"
```

Right now it correctly renders "error" when you enter an invalid value, but it
also renders "error" if the input is blank. It might be bit more user-friendly
to instead show "? °F" like before. We can do that by wrapping the switch
expression in a ternary expression:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
    celsius == ""
      ? {js|? °F|js}
      : (
        switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
        | exception _ => "error"
        | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
        }
      )
  )
  |> React.string}
```

The ternary expression (`condition ? a : b`) works the same as in JavaScript.
But in OCaml, it's also shorthand for an if-else expression (`if (condition) {
a; } else { b; }`). So we could rewrite it as this:

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
{(
  if (celsius == "") {
    {js|? °F|js};
  } else {
    switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float) {
    | exception _ => "error"
    | fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
    };
  }
)
|> React.string}
```

Unlike in JavaScript, the if-else construct is an expression and always yields a
value. Both branches must return a value of the same type or you'll get a
compilation error. In practice, if-else expressions aren't very common in OCaml
code because in simple cases you can use ternary, and in more complex cases you
can use switch. But it's a nice, familiar fallback you can rely on when you
haven't quite gotten used to OCaml syntax yet.

If we enter a value with a lot of decimals in it, e.g. `21.1223456`, we'll
get a Fahrenheit value with a lot of decimals in it as well. We can limit the
number of decimals in the converted value using
[Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Float/index.html#val-toFixedWithPrecision):

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert) {
| exception _ => "error"
| fahrenheit => Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(fahrenheit, ~digits=2) ++ {js| °F|js}
};
```

`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision` is a function that has one positional argument
and one [labeled argument](../communicate-with-javascript.md#labeled-arguments).
In this case, the labeled argument is named `digits` and it's receiving a value
of `2`. It's not possible to pass in the value of a labeled argument without
using the `~label=value` syntax. We'll see more of labeled arguments in the
following chapters when we introduce props (todo).

You might have noticed that the function chain feeding the switch expression got
a bit shorter, from

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> string_of_float
```

to

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
celsius |> float_of_string |> convert
```

This happened because `string_of_float`, which takes a single argument, was
replaced by `Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision`, which takes two arguments, and
functions chained using `|>` can only take a single argument. But this
one-argument restriction actually doesn't prevent us from putting
`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision` in the chain! We can take advantage of OCaml's
[partial
application](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/function#partial-application)
feature to create a one-argument function by writing
`Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(~digits=2)`. Then our switch expression becomes

<!--#prelude#
let celsius = "1";
let convert = x => x;
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
switch (celsius |> float_of_string |> convert |> Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(~digits=2)) {
| exception _ => "error"
| fahrenheit => fahrenheit ++ {js| °F|js}
}
```

We have a working component now, but catching exceptions isn't The OCaml Way! In
the next chapter, you'll see how to rewrite the logic using `option`.

## Exercises

<b>1.</b> Try changing `{js|°C = |js}` to `"°C = "`. What happens?

<b>2.</b> It's possible to rewrite the `onChange` callback so that it contains a
single expression:

<!--#prelude#
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
<input value=celsius onChange={evt => setCelsius(_ => getValueFromEvent(evt))} />
```

This compiles, but it now contains a hidden bug. Do you know what silent error
might occur?

<b>3.</b> It's possible to use partial application with most functions in OCaml,
even operators. Take a look at the following program:

```reasonml
let addFive = (+)(5);
Js.log(addFive(2));
Js.log(addFive(7));
Js.log(addFive(10));
```

What do you think it outputs? Run it in [Melange
Playground](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground) to confirm your hypothesis.

<b>4.</b> Use the pipe last operator (`|>`) and partial application to write a
function that takes an integer
argument `x`, subtracts `x` from 10, and converts that result to binary. Hint:
Use the
[Js.Int.toStringWithRadix](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Int/#val-toStringWithRadix)
function.

## Overview

- Polymorphic objects (`{_.. }`) can have fields of any name and type.
    - You access fields of an object using the `##` operator.
    - You can use type annotations to make the use of objects safer.
- Concatenate strings using the `++` operator.
- Switch expressions can be used to catch exceptions.
- Ternary expressions have the same syntax as in JS. Unlike in JS, they are also
  shorthand for if-else expressions.
- The two branches of if-else expressions must return values of the same type.
- Besides positional arguments, OCaml functions can also have labeled arguments.
- If a function takes two arguments, we can supply one of them and get a
  function that takes only one argument. This is called partial application.

## Solutions

<b>1.</b> Changing it to `"°C = "` will result in a bit of gibberish being
rendered: "Â°C". We can't rely on OCaml strings to [deal with Unicode
correctly](../communicate-with-javascript.md#strings), so any string that
contains non-ASCII text must be delimited using `{js||js}`.

<b>2.</b> Rewriting `onChange` the handler to use a single expression creates a
potential problem with stale values coming from the event object:

<!--#prelude#
let getValueFromEvent = (evt): string => ReactEvent.Form.target(evt)##value;
let (celsius, setCelsius) = React.useState(() => "");
let _ =
-->
```reasonml
<input value=celsius onChange={evt => setCelsius(_ => getValueFromEvent(evt))} />
```

Inside of `onChange`, we can expect the function `getValueFromEvent(evt)` to
return the latest value of the `input`. However, we are now calling
`getValueFromEvent(evt)` from a different function---the callback we pass to
`setCelsius`! By the time that `setCelsius`'s callback is invoked, the `evt`
object might have been recycled and no longer have the same value as when
`onChange` was initially invoked. For more details about this, see [Using Event
Values with
useState](https://reasonml.github.io/reason-react/docs/en/usestate-event-value)
in the [ReasonReact](https://reasonml.github.io/reason-react/) docs.

<b>3.</b> [Define an addFive function using partial application](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground/?language=Reason&code=bGV0IGFkZEZpdmUgPSAoKykoNSk7CkpzLmxvZyhhZGRGaXZlKDIpKTsKSnMubG9nKGFkZEZpdmUoNykpOwpKcy5sb2coYWRkRml2ZSgxMCkpOw%3D%3D&live=off)

<b>4.</b> [Define a function that subtracts from 10 and converts to binary](https://melange.re/v2.0.0/playground/?language=Reason&code=bGV0IGNvb2xGdW5jdGlvbiA9IHggPT4geCB8PiAoKC0pKDEwKSkgfD4gSnMuSW50LnRvU3RyaW5nV2l0aFJhZGl4KH5yYWRpeD0yKTsKSnMubG9nKGNvb2xGdW5jdGlvbigxKSk7CkpzLmxvZyhjb29sRnVuY3Rpb24oNSkpOw%3D%3D&live=off)

-----

[Source code for this
chapter](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/develop/src/celsius-converter-exception/)
can be found in the [Melange for React Developers
repo](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs).
