docs/melange-book/installation.md, before:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

- You are running a Unix system
  - Windows users are encouraged to install [Windows Subsystem for
Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/)
- You have a recent version of, and know how to use:
  - [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)
  - [git](https://git-scm.com/)
  - [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

## Opam

We need [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/), the OCaml Package Manager. There are
many ways to install it depending on your platform, but let's go with the
simplest method:

    bash -c "sh <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.sh)"
    opam init
    eval $(opam env)

While `opam init` is running, it will prompt you with something like "Do you
want opam to modify ~/.profile?". Type `y` to agree.

## Melange opam template

Let's make sure that everything works by downloading and running
[melange-opam-template](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-opam-template).

    git clone https://github.com/melange-re/melange-opam-template
    cd melange-opam-template
    make init
    make build
    make serve

While `make init` you can consider grabbing some coffee or other beverage, as it
might take a while the first time. The last command, `make serve`, should open a
tab in your default browser which points to http://localhost:8081/ and shows
you a typical "Hello World" page.

## OCaml Platform Visual Studio Code Extension

Open the Extensions tab in Visual Studio Code and search for "ocaml". Install
the [OCaml
Platform](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ocamllabs.ocaml-platform)
extension from OCaml Labs. To verify that the extension worked, open the
melange-opam-template we downloaded in the last step in Visual Code. Code should
be syntax highlighted, and you should see type annotations when you hover over
variables. Now [open your User Settings JSON
file](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/settings#_settingsjson) and
add this:

```json
"[reason]": {
  "editor.formatOnSave": true,
  "editor.defaultFormatter": "ocamllabs.ocaml-platform"
}
```

Commit message:

Update installation chapter based on feedback

docs/melange-book/installation.md, after:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

- You are running a Unix system
  - Windows users are encouraged to install [Windows Subsystem for
Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/)
- You have a recent version of, and know how to use:
  - [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)
  - [git](https://git-scm.com/)
  - [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

## Opam

We need [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/), the OCaml Package Manager. There are
many ways to install it depending on your platform, but let's go with the
simplest method:

    bash -c "sh <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.sh)"
    opam init
    eval $(opam env)

While `opam init` is running, it will prompt you with something like "Do you
want opam to modify ~/.profile?". Type `y` to agree. After the installation
completes, run `opam --version` to verify that it succeeded.

## Melange tutorial template

Let's make sure that everything works by downloading and running our project
template
[melange-tutorial](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-tutorial).

    git clone https://github.com/melange-re/melange-tutorial
    cd melange-tutorial
    make init
    make build
    make serve

While `make init` is running, consider grabbing some coffee or other beverage,
as it might take a while to fetch all the dependencies and build them. The last
command, `make serve`, should open a tab in your default browser which points to
http://localhost:8080/ and shows you a typical "Hello World" page. If you see
this page, then the project was successfully installed!

## OCaml Platform Visual Studio Code Extension

Open the Extensions tab in Visual Studio Code and search for "ocaml". Install
the [OCaml
Platform](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ocamllabs.ocaml-platform)
extension from OCaml Labs. To verify that the extension worked, open the
melange-tutorial project in Visual Studio Code. OCaml code should be syntax
highlighted, and you should see type annotations when you hover over variables.
Now [open your User Settings JSON
file](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/settings#_settingsjson) and
add this snippet:

```json
"[reason]": {
  "editor.formatOnSave": true,
  "editor.defaultFormatter": "ocamllabs.ocaml-platform"
}
```
