# Melange

<div id="home-subtitle">OCaml for JavaScript developers</div>

---

Melange is a backend for the OCaml compiler that emits JavaScript. Melange
strives to provide the best integration with both the OCaml and JavaScript
ecosystems. To know more about it start by reading the [introductory
tutorial](getting-started.md), then check the [Learn](learn.md) section for more
information.

<!-- Temporarily disabled in readthedocs mode
<div class="text-center">
<a href="getting-started" class="btn btn-primary" role="button">Getting Started</a>
<a href="learn" class="btn btn-primary" role="button">Learn</a>
</div>
-->

<div class="jumbotron">
<h2 class="display-4 text-center">Features</h2>
<div class="row">
  <div class="col-sm-6">
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-body">
        <h3 class="card-title">A Solid Type System</h3>
        <p class="card-text">
            Melange leverages OCaml's powerful type system to catch more bugs at
            compile time. Large, complex codebases become easy to maintain and
            refactor.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="col-sm-6">
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-body">
        <h3 class="card-title">First-Class Editor and Tooling</h3>
        <p class="card-text">
            Melange fully utilizes the power of
            <a href="https://ocaml.org/docs/platform">the OCaml Platform</a>
            to provide integrations with editors such as VSCode, Vim, or Emacs,
            with features like type inspection, autocomplete, and more. It also
            has first-class integration with <a
            href="https://dune.build/">Dune</a>, OCaml's most used build system.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-sm-6">
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-body">
        <h3 class="card-title">JavaScript Integration</h3>
        <p class="card-text">
            Whether you want to use existing JavaScript packages from NPM, or
            use your own JavaScript libraries in your projects, Melange has you
            covered. With an expressive bindings language, and an ergonomic
            compilation model, Melange can help you build robust applications
            that leverage functionality from the JavaScript ecosystem.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="col-sm-6">
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-body">
        <h3 class="card-title">Stable and Industry Backed</h3>
        <p class="card-text">
            Melange builds on top of decades of type system research, compiler
            engineering and tooling development to provide a polished
            developer experience. Companies like Ahrefs use Melange daily to
            deploy web applications for their users.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
</div>

## What is Melange

At its core, Melange consists of several key components:

- The [compiler libraries](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-compiler-libs):
  a fork of the [OCaml compiler
  libraries](https://v2.ocaml.org/api/compilerlibref/Compiler_libs.html) that
  adapts some of its parts to produce lean JavaScript code instead of bytecode
  or assembly.
- The compiler (`melc`): the executable that takes OCaml code as input and
  generates JavaScript. It depends on the Melange compiler libraries.
- The
  [runtime](https://github.com/melange-re/melange/tree/c5bf086511ed4830018e67ca63df86045dbe356d/jscomp/runtime):
  a small piece of code that is needed to run JavaScript programs generated by
  the compiler.
- The [standard libraries](./api.md): Melange comes with a set of building
  blocks, like data structures, functions, and bindings to JavaScript APIs, to
  help developers build their apps faster.
- The preprocessor (`melange.ppx`): a
  [meta-programming](https://ocaml.org/docs/metaprogramming) tool to preprocess
  Melange programs and facilitate code generation for common use cases like
  bindings or generation of code from types.
- The [playground](./playground): a browser-based version of the compiler to try
  and share Melange snippets and small programs.

Besides the above, which would be Melange core parts, there is an effort to
integrate Melange into the larger OCaml Platform and other tools and libraries
in the OCaml ecosystem:

- A [build system](./build-system.md): [Dune](https://dune.readthedocs.io), a
  build system for OCaml, offers first-class support for Melange.
- A [package manager](./package-management.md): Melange integrates with
  [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/), OCaml's default package manager.
- A package repository: Melange libraries and tools are published into [opam's
  official repository](https://opam.ocaml.org/packages/).
- Alternative syntax: Melange allows users to write their apps using [Reason
  syntax](reasonml.github.io/), in particular, it has full support for React
  applications through the Melange bindings library
  [ReasonReact](https://reasonml.github.io/reason-react/).
- Editor integration: Melange is fully compatible with the [OCaml editor
  tools](https://ocaml.org/docs/set-up-editor).
