docs/learn.md, before:

# Learn

## New to OCaml?

As Melange is a fork of the OCaml compiler, this documentation is designed to
include the differences between both. But for the parts that overlap between
Melange and OCaml, we will always refer to the main OCaml documentation
throughout these docs.

If you are completely new to OCaml, you might want to get familiar first with
the language, there are [plenty of resources available](https://ocaml.org/docs),
but we recommend the following tutorials from the official OCaml website:

- [A First Hour With OCaml](https://ocaml.org/docs/first-hour)
- [OCaml Exercises](https://ocaml.org/problems)

## Why Melange

Melange is a fork of the OCaml compiler that produces JavaScript.

OCaml offers an industrial-strength, state-of-the-art type system and provides
type inference with very few type annotations, proving invaluable in managing
large projects.

JavaScript is one of the most pervasive platforms to deploy and run software.
Thanks to years of efforts to improve the different VMs available, the
JavaScript code running on browsers and other environments is heavily optimized
and can support use cases for large products and tools.

Melange helps developers and companies bring the advantages of the OCaml
platform to users of the Web platform in a way that makes it easy for developers
to integrate with both ecosystems.

### A bit of history

To better understand where Melange comes from, it might help to go through some
of the related projects that have appeared over the last decade or so.

#### Js_of_ocaml

[Js_of_ocaml](https://github.com/ocsigen/js_of_ocaml/) is another OCaml to
JavaScript compiler that was made public in 2011. In [the presentation
paper](https://www.irif.fr/~balat/publications/vouillon_balat-js_of_ocaml.pdf)
published in 2013, it’s explicitly mentioned that one of its design goals was to
remain as compatible as possible with the OCaml compiler, without requiring a
lot of maintenance work, as the OCaml community was not excessively large at the
time.

To achieve this goal, Js_of_ocaml picks the bytecode generated by OCaml [batch
compilation](https://ocaml.org/manual/comp.html) and generates JavaScript from
it. OCaml bytecode has a very stable interface, so Js_of_ocaml can easily
upgrade to new versions of the compiler. Due to this design decision, it can
also remain compatible with most of the OCaml ecosystem, as long as the tools or
libraries don’t rely on C code.

The downside of using bytecode is that it gets harder to communicate with
existing JavaScript code. For example, a Js_of_ocaml string is not compiled as a
JavaScript string, so some conversion is needed for this and other types.

Another downside is that the resulting JavaScript is hard to read, as it is
converted from a low-level representation like bytecode.

#### BuckleScript

Then, in 2016, Bob Zhang suggests [on a Js_of_ocaml repository
issue](https://github.com/ocsigen/js_of_ocaml/issues/338) the possibility to
start converting to JavaScript from an earlier stage of the compilation process,
instead of using bytecode. This proposal fundamentally diverges from Js_of_ocaml
original design and goals, so he starts working on what will become
BuckleScript.

BuckleScript gets some inspiration from Js_of_ocaml, for example in the way that
JavaScript objects are represented with `Js.t`. But it differs from Js_of_ocaml
in many ways: it can generate more readable and lighter code. It also generates
one `.js` file per module, which makes it easier to integrate with existing
JavaScript codebases. BuckleScript puts a big emphasis on communicating with
JavaScript code through a rich collection of attributes applied to `external`
primitives.

#### Reason

Around the same year, a project called [Reason](https://reasonml.github.io/)
appears at Facebook. Led by Jordan Walke, the idea is to create an alternate
syntax for OCaml that is closer to C and JavaScript. Even if Reason has no take
on which platform the code is deployed —native applications binaries, or web
applications using JavaScript as a target language—, BuckleScript adds first
class support for Reason from early on. At that point, it becomes evident that
the combination of Reason with BuckleScript is a great match: BuckleScript
provides tools and infrastructure to work with JavaScript ecosystem, while
Reason allows developers to write their programs in a syntax they are familiar
with.

Over time, and with help of other Facebook employees and the community providing
bindings to pervasive JavaScript libraries like React.js with
[`reason-react`](https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react/), the combination of
Reason and BuckleScript gains adoption.

#### BuckleScript gets rebranded

However, at some point the goals of both BuckleScript and Reason projects become
harder to reconcile. In August 2020, the BuckleScript team decides to rename to
ReScript, stops adding support for the latest versions of the Reason parser, and
replaces it with a new parser that changes the syntax. The reasons for the
rebranding are explained in [the official ReScript blog
post](https://rescript-lang.org/blog/bucklescript-is-rebranding).

The rebranding is trying to ease onboarding and adoption of the ReScript
language, giving the project more chances to compete with mainstream
compiled-to-JavaScript languages like TypeScript. However, for many existing
users of BuckleScript and Reason, it is the explicit confirmation of something
that had been hinted implicitly before: ReScript goals are not compatible with
providing a good integration with the OCaml ecosystem.

#### Melange: back to OCaml

This is where Melange comes in. A few weeks after the rebranding of BuckleScript
to ReScript, António Monteiro starts working on a fork of BuckleScript with a
simple (not easy) goal: replace the [Ninja build
system](https://ninja-build.org/), which BuckleScript had been using from its
creation, with [Dune](https://dune.build/), which is the most used build system
for OCaml projects.

This fork of BuckleScript is later named Melange. After finishing the switch
from Ninja to Dune, several additional features were added to bring it closer to
OCaml. Some examples are the upgrade of the compiler version used by Melange to
4.12, or modelling the changes to the OCaml compiler that Melange uses as just a
plain library, instead of a full fork of the whole compiler.

## Package management

Melange uses a dual approach to package management:

- For Melange libraries and bindings, use [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/).
- For JavaScript packages required by Melange bindings, use
  [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/) (or [any of its
  alternatives](https://npmtrends.com/@microsoft/rush-vs-bolt-vs-pnpm-vs-rush-vs-yarn)).

This dual approach has some obvious downsides, such as forcing Melange
applications to have both an `<app_name>.opam` and a `package.json` file.
However, it unlocks the advantages of both ecosystems. As we will see below,
opam has been designed for the OCaml language, which makes the developer
experience fundamentally different from npm in the way it handles and installs
dependencies.

In the following sections, we will go through the details of how to use opam to
define the dependencies of our application, as well as how to publish packages
in the public opam repository. However, this documentation is not exhaustive and
only covers what we believe are the most important parts for Melange developers.
If you want to learn more about opam, please refer to the [opam
manual](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html) and [FAQ
page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/FAQ.html).

### opam for Melange developers

Before diving into specifics about using opam, there are the two relevant
differences between opam and npm that are worth mentioning.

**1. One version of each package**

At any given time, any opam switch can only *at most* a single version of a
package. This is known as a flat dependency graph, and some package managers in
other languages (like [Bower](https://bower.io/)) follow a similar approach.

A flat dependency graph means that, for example, it is impossible to have two
versions of [`reason-react`](https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react/)
installed in the same project. This avoids some headaches when one inadvertently
installs two versions of a dependency. Also, and specifically for Melange, it
helps keep the resulting JavaScript bundle lean and reduce page load for
browser-based applications.

On the other hand, upgrading your project dependencies to more recent versions
might become tricky. Due to the restriction where only one version of a package
can be installed, there is a higher chance for conflicts between the constraints
of the transitive dependencies. If opam cannot find a solution, these conflicts
need to be solved manually. This generally involves updating the conflicting
dependency to make it compatible with a newer version of Melange or a transient
dependency.

**2. A source-based package manager for a compiled language**

opam distributes just the source code of the packages and leaves the compilation
step to a build phase that runs when consuming them, after they have been
fetched. As the package manager for a compiled language like OCaml, opam has
first-class support for this build step. Every package must tell opam how it
should be built, and the way to do this is by using the [`build`
field](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html#opamfield-build) in the package
`.opam` file.

This is different from how npm handles packages. Because npm has been designed
for JavaScript (an interpreted language) having a build step makes no sense.
Whenever any project or community tries to use npm to distribute software that
includes code written in compiled languages, the burden to distribute pre-built
binaries is imposed on library authors, like [the node-sass
example](https://github.com/sass/node-sass/issues/1589) shows.

As Melange relies heavily on OCaml packages for the compilation step (either
PPXs, linters, instrumentation, or any other build-time package), using opam
provides access to these tools without library authors having to care about
creating and distributing pre-built versions of their packages.

---

Let's go now through the most common actions with opam when working on Melange
projects. The following guide is based on the amazing [opam for npm/yarn
users](http://ocamlverse.net/content/opam_npm.html) guide by Louis
([@khady](https://github.com/Khady)).

#### Initial configuration

The first thing to do is to install opam. There is an [official documentation
page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html) on installation. Most of the
time, we can simply get it from your package manager. Otherwise, binaries are
provided for every platform.

There is a necessary first step before using opam:

```bash
opam init -a
```

Here is what the documentation of the `opam init` command says:

> The init command initialises a local "opam root" (by default, `~/.opam/`) that
> holds opam's data and packages. This is a necessary step for normal operation
> of opam. The initial software repositories are fetched, and an initial
> 'switch' can also be installed, according to the configuration and options.
> These can be afterwards configured using opam switch and opam repository.

> Additionally, this command allows to customise some aspects of opam's shell
> integration, when run initially (avoiding the interactive dialog), but also at
> any later time.

The interesting parts are:

- The opam root is at `~/.opam`
- opam uses shell integration to make our life easier
- opam uses the concept of a *switch*

A switch is the equivalent of the `node_modules` folder in npm’s world. It
contains all the packages that are installed. There are local switches and
global switches, in the same way we can have a `node_modules` folder local to
our project or install global dependencies using `yarn global` or `npm install
-g`. Global switches can be handy sometimes, but to avoid confusion, the
recommendation is to avoid them.

The default settings can be changed if the `-a` option is omitted while calling
`opam init`.

#### Minimal `app.opam` file

The equivalent to `package.json` is an `app.opam` file, where `app` is the name
of the package. It is possible to have multiple opam files in the same directory
or project.

There is no opam command to manipulate the opam file. A command similar to `npm
init` or `yarn add` does not exist in opam, so the updates in `.opam` files have
to be done by hand.

A minimal `.opam` file looks like this:

```
opam-version: "2.0"
name: "my-app"
authors: "Louis"
homepage: "https://github.com/khady/example"
maintainer: "ex@ample.com"
dev-repo: "git+ssh://git@github.com:khady/example.git"
bug-reports: "https://github.com/khady/example/issues"
version: "0.1"
build: [
  [ "dune" "subst" ] {pinned}
  [ "dune" "build" "-p" name "-j" jobs ]
]
depends: [
  "dune" {build}
]
```

`build:` tells opam that `dune` is needed only to build the project.

#### Installing packages

The first thing we need is a local switch in the current project. To verify if a
switch exists already, we can look for a `_opam` directory at the root of the
project or use the `opam switch` command to identify if a switch already exists
in the project folder.

If it does not exist, we can create it with:

```bash
opam switch create . 4.14.1 --deps-only
```

If it exists, we can install the dependencies of the project with:

```bash
opam install . --deps-only
```

#### Add new packages

To add a new package to the opam switch, we can do:

```bash
opam install <package_name>
```

But opam will not modify the `app.opam` file during the installation, this has
to be done by hand. It is as simple as adding the name of the package in the
`depends` field.

#### Linking packages for development

This can be achieved with `opam pin`. For example, to pin a package to a
specific commit on GitHub:

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react.git#61bfbfaf8c971dec5152bce7e528d30552c70bc5
```

Branch names can also be used.

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react.git#feature
```

A shortcut to get the latest version of a package is to use the `--dev-repo`
flag, e.g.

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev --dev-repo
```

To remove the pinning for any package, use `opam unpin <package_name>` or `opam
pin remove <package_name>`.

For other options, the command is well described in [the official
documentation](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Usage.html#opam-pin).

#### Upgrading packages

To upgrade the installed packages to the latest version, run:

```bash
opam upgrade <package_name>
```

`opam upgrade` is also able to upgrade *all* the packages of the local switch if
no package name is given.

There is one big difference compared to npm: opam stores a local copy of the
opam repository, like `apt-get` does in Debian. So we often want to update this
copy before requesting an upgrade:

```bash
opam update && opam upgrade <package_name>
```

#### Dev dependencies

You can use the [`with-dev-setup`
field](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html#pkgvar-with-dev-setup) to define
dependencies that are only required at development time. For example:

```
depends: [
  "ocamlformat" {with-dev-setup}
]
```

This has to be combined with the `--with-dev-setup` flag when installing
dependencies, e.g. `opam install --deps-only --with-dev-setup`.

#### Lock files

Lock files are also not common yet in the opam world, but they can be used as
follows:

- Using `opam lock` to generate the lock file when needed (basically after each
  `opam install` or `opam upgrade`).
- Adding `--locked` to all the `opam install --deps-only` and `opam switch
  create .` commands.


#### Bindings and package management

When writing Melange libraries that bind to existing JavaScript packages, the
users of the Melange library will have to make sure to install those JavaScript
packages manually.

This is similar to how OCaml bindings to system libraries work, see examples
like
[`ocaml-mariadb`](https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-mariadb/blob/9db2e4d8dec7c584213d0e0f03d079a36a35d9d5/README.md?plain=1#L18-L20)
or
[`ocurl`](https://github.com/ygrek/ocurl/blob/f0c6f47d6f3d25282648439dc4ade5810a993710/README.md?plain=1#L16).

The advantage of this approach —as opposed to vendoring the JavaScript packages
inside the bindings— is that it gives users of the bindings complete flexibility
over the way these JavaScript packages are downloaded and bundled.

## Build system

_TODO: Explain compilation model (1:1 ml/js), intro to dune._

## Communicate with JavaScript

_TODO: Sections will be something like:_
```
- intro: explain attributes, extensions, and `bs.` backwards compatibility
- `melange.ppx` preprocessor and extensions
- data types
- call javascript from melange:
  - intro to external (link to OCaml docs)
  - bindings with external (to functions, objects or other values)
  - global values
- call melange from javascript
```

## Additions to OCaml
_TODO: pipe first_

## Melange for X users

_TODO: For ReScript users, for OCaml users, for TypeScript/JavaScript users._

Commit message:

learn: + dune/melange integration project to history

docs/learn.md, after:

# Learn

## New to OCaml?

As Melange is a fork of the OCaml compiler, this documentation is designed to
include the differences between both. But for the parts that overlap between
Melange and OCaml, we will always refer to the main OCaml documentation
throughout these docs.

If you are completely new to OCaml, you might want to get familiar first with
the language, there are [plenty of resources available](https://ocaml.org/docs),
but we recommend the following tutorials from the official OCaml website:

- [A First Hour With OCaml](https://ocaml.org/docs/first-hour)
- [OCaml Exercises](https://ocaml.org/problems)

## Why Melange

Melange is a fork of the OCaml compiler that produces JavaScript.

OCaml offers an industrial-strength, state-of-the-art type system and provides
type inference with very few type annotations, proving invaluable in managing
large projects.

JavaScript is one of the most pervasive platforms to deploy and run software.
Thanks to years of efforts to improve the different VMs available, the
JavaScript code running on browsers and other environments is heavily optimized
and can support use cases for large products and tools.

Melange helps developers and companies bring the advantages of the OCaml
platform to users of the Web platform in a way that makes it easy for developers
to integrate with both ecosystems.

### A bit of history

To better understand where Melange comes from, it might help to go through some
of the related projects that have appeared over the last decade or so.

#### Js_of_ocaml

[Js_of_ocaml](https://github.com/ocsigen/js_of_ocaml/) is another OCaml to
JavaScript compiler that was made public in 2011. In [the presentation
paper](https://www.irif.fr/~balat/publications/vouillon_balat-js_of_ocaml.pdf)
published in 2013, it’s explicitly mentioned that one of its design goals was to
remain as compatible as possible with the OCaml compiler, without requiring a
lot of maintenance work, as the OCaml community was not excessively large at the
time.

To achieve this goal, Js_of_ocaml picks the bytecode generated by OCaml [batch
compilation](https://ocaml.org/manual/comp.html) and generates JavaScript from
it. OCaml bytecode has a very stable interface, so Js_of_ocaml can easily
upgrade to new versions of the compiler. Due to this design decision, it can
also remain compatible with most of the OCaml ecosystem, as long as the tools or
libraries don’t rely on C code.

The downside of using bytecode is that it gets harder to communicate with
existing JavaScript code. For example, a Js_of_ocaml string is not compiled as a
JavaScript string, so some conversion is needed for this and other types.

Another downside is that the resulting JavaScript is hard to read, as it is
converted from a low-level representation like bytecode.

#### BuckleScript

Then, in 2016, Bob Zhang suggests [on a Js_of_ocaml repository
issue](https://github.com/ocsigen/js_of_ocaml/issues/338) the possibility to
start converting to JavaScript from an earlier stage of the compilation process,
instead of using bytecode. This proposal fundamentally diverges from Js_of_ocaml
original design and goals, so he starts working on what will become
BuckleScript.

BuckleScript gets some inspiration from Js_of_ocaml, for example in the way that
JavaScript objects are represented with `Js.t`. But it differs from Js_of_ocaml
in many ways: it can generate more readable and lighter code. It also generates
one `.js` file per module, which makes it easier to integrate with existing
JavaScript codebases. BuckleScript puts a big emphasis on communicating with
JavaScript code through a rich collection of attributes applied to `external`
primitives.

#### Reason

Around the same year, a project called [Reason](https://reasonml.github.io/)
appears at Facebook. Led by Jordan Walke, the idea is to create an alternate
syntax for OCaml that is closer to C and JavaScript. Even if Reason has no take
on which platform the code is deployed —native applications binaries, or web
applications using JavaScript as a target language—, BuckleScript adds first
class support for Reason from early on. At that point, it becomes evident that
the combination of Reason with BuckleScript is a great match: BuckleScript
provides tools and infrastructure to work with JavaScript ecosystem, while
Reason allows developers to write their programs in a syntax they are familiar
with.

Over time, and with help of other Facebook employees and the community providing
bindings to pervasive JavaScript libraries like React.js with
[`reason-react`](https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react/), the combination of
Reason and BuckleScript gains adoption.

#### BuckleScript gets rebranded

However, at some point the goals of both BuckleScript and Reason projects become
harder to reconcile. In August 2020, the BuckleScript team decides to rename to
ReScript, stops adding support for the latest versions of the Reason parser, and
replaces it with a new parser that changes the syntax. The reasons for the
rebranding are explained in [the official ReScript blog
post](https://rescript-lang.org/blog/bucklescript-is-rebranding).

The rebranding is trying to ease onboarding and adoption of the ReScript
language, giving the project more chances to compete with mainstream
compiled-to-JavaScript languages like TypeScript. However, for many existing
users of BuckleScript and Reason, it is the explicit confirmation of something
that had been hinted implicitly before: ReScript goals are not compatible with
providing a good integration with the OCaml ecosystem.

#### Melange: back to OCaml

This is where Melange comes in. A few weeks after the rebranding of BuckleScript
to ReScript, António Monteiro starts working on a fork of BuckleScript with a
simple (not easy) goal: replace the [Ninja build
system](https://ninja-build.org/), which BuckleScript had been using from its
creation, with [Dune](https://dune.build/), which is the most used build system
for OCaml projects.

This fork of BuckleScript is later named Melange. After finishing the switch
from Ninja to Dune, several additional features are added to bring it closer to
OCaml. Some examples are the upgrade of the OCaml compiler version used by
Melange, or modelling the changes to the OCaml compiler that Melange uses as
just a plain library, instead of a full fork of the whole compiler.

In September 2022, Ahrefs decides to invest on Melange by funding a project to
deepen the integration between Dune and Melange. This project achieves its
completion in Spring 2023, with the [migration of Ahrefs frontend codebase to
Melange](https://tech.ahrefs.com/ahrefs-is-now-built-with-melange-b14f5ec56df4)
and the new public releases that support it: version 3.8 of Dune and 1.0 of
Melange.

## Package management

Melange uses a dual approach to package management:

- For Melange libraries and bindings, use [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/).
- For JavaScript packages required by Melange bindings, use
  [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/) (or [any of its
  alternatives](https://npmtrends.com/@microsoft/rush-vs-bolt-vs-pnpm-vs-rush-vs-yarn)).

This dual approach has some obvious downsides, such as forcing Melange
applications to have both an `<app_name>.opam` and a `package.json` file.
However, it unlocks the advantages of both ecosystems. As we will see below,
opam has been designed for the OCaml language, which makes the developer
experience fundamentally different from npm in the way it handles and installs
dependencies.

In the following sections, we will go through the details of how to use opam to
define the dependencies of our application, as well as how to publish packages
in the public opam repository. However, this documentation is not exhaustive and
only covers what we believe are the most important parts for Melange developers.
If you want to learn more about opam, please refer to the [opam
manual](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html) and [FAQ
page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/FAQ.html).

### opam for Melange developers

Before diving into specifics about using opam, there are the two relevant
differences between opam and npm that are worth mentioning.

**1. One version of each package**

At any given time, any opam switch can only *at most* a single version of a
package. This is known as a flat dependency graph, and some package managers in
other languages (like [Bower](https://bower.io/)) follow a similar approach.

A flat dependency graph means that, for example, it is impossible to have two
versions of [`reason-react`](https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react/)
installed in the same project. This avoids some headaches when one inadvertently
installs two versions of a dependency. Also, and specifically for Melange, it
helps keep the resulting JavaScript bundle lean and reduce page load for
browser-based applications.

On the other hand, upgrading your project dependencies to more recent versions
might become tricky. Due to the restriction where only one version of a package
can be installed, there is a higher chance for conflicts between the constraints
of the transitive dependencies. If opam cannot find a solution, these conflicts
need to be solved manually. This generally involves updating the conflicting
dependency to make it compatible with a newer version of Melange or a transient
dependency.

**2. A source-based package manager for a compiled language**

opam distributes just the source code of the packages and leaves the compilation
step to a build phase that runs when consuming them, after they have been
fetched. As the package manager for a compiled language like OCaml, opam has
first-class support for this build step. Every package must tell opam how it
should be built, and the way to do this is by using the [`build`
field](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html#opamfield-build) in the package
`.opam` file.

This is different from how npm handles packages. Because npm has been designed
for JavaScript (an interpreted language) having a build step makes no sense.
Whenever any project or community tries to use npm to distribute software that
includes code written in compiled languages, the burden to distribute pre-built
binaries is imposed on library authors, like [the node-sass
example](https://github.com/sass/node-sass/issues/1589) shows.

As Melange relies heavily on OCaml packages for the compilation step (either
PPXs, linters, instrumentation, or any other build-time package), using opam
provides access to these tools without library authors having to care about
creating and distributing pre-built versions of their packages.

---

Let's go now through the most common actions with opam when working on Melange
projects. The following guide is based on the amazing [opam for npm/yarn
users](http://ocamlverse.net/content/opam_npm.html) guide by Louis
([@khady](https://github.com/Khady)).

#### Initial configuration

The first thing to do is to install opam. There is an [official documentation
page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html) on installation. Most of the
time, we can simply get it from your package manager. Otherwise, binaries are
provided for every platform.

There is a necessary first step before using opam:

```bash
opam init -a
```

Here is what the documentation of the `opam init` command says:

> The init command initialises a local "opam root" (by default, `~/.opam/`) that
> holds opam's data and packages. This is a necessary step for normal operation
> of opam. The initial software repositories are fetched, and an initial
> 'switch' can also be installed, according to the configuration and options.
> These can be afterwards configured using opam switch and opam repository.

> Additionally, this command allows to customise some aspects of opam's shell
> integration, when run initially (avoiding the interactive dialog), but also at
> any later time.

The interesting parts are:

- The opam root is at `~/.opam`
- opam uses shell integration to make our life easier
- opam uses the concept of a *switch*

A switch is the equivalent of the `node_modules` folder in npm’s world. It
contains all the packages that are installed. There are local switches and
global switches, in the same way we can have a `node_modules` folder local to
our project or install global dependencies using `yarn global` or `npm install
-g`. Global switches can be handy sometimes, but to avoid confusion, the
recommendation is to avoid them.

The default settings can be changed if the `-a` option is omitted while calling
`opam init`.

#### Minimal `app.opam` file

The equivalent to `package.json` is an `app.opam` file, where `app` is the name
of the package. It is possible to have multiple opam files in the same directory
or project.

There is no opam command to manipulate the opam file. A command similar to `npm
init` or `yarn add` does not exist in opam, so the updates in `.opam` files have
to be done by hand.

A minimal `.opam` file looks like this:

```
opam-version: "2.0"
name: "my-app"
authors: "Louis"
homepage: "https://github.com/khady/example"
maintainer: "ex@ample.com"
dev-repo: "git+ssh://git@github.com:khady/example.git"
bug-reports: "https://github.com/khady/example/issues"
version: "0.1"
build: [
  [ "dune" "subst" ] {pinned}
  [ "dune" "build" "-p" name "-j" jobs ]
]
depends: [
  "dune" {build}
]
```

`build:` tells opam that `dune` is needed only to build the project.

#### Installing packages

The first thing we need is a local switch in the current project. To verify if a
switch exists already, we can look for a `_opam` directory at the root of the
project or use the `opam switch` command to identify if a switch already exists
in the project folder.

If it does not exist, we can create it with:

```bash
opam switch create . 4.14.1 --deps-only
```

If it exists, we can install the dependencies of the project with:

```bash
opam install . --deps-only
```

#### Add new packages

To add a new package to the opam switch, we can do:

```bash
opam install <package_name>
```

But opam will not modify the `app.opam` file during the installation, this has
to be done by hand. It is as simple as adding the name of the package in the
`depends` field.

#### Linking packages for development

This can be achieved with `opam pin`. For example, to pin a package to a
specific commit on GitHub:

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react.git#61bfbfaf8c971dec5152bce7e528d30552c70bc5
```

Branch names can also be used.

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react.git#feature
```

A shortcut to get the latest version of a package is to use the `--dev-repo`
flag, e.g.

```bash
opam pin add reason-react.dev --dev-repo
```

To remove the pinning for any package, use `opam unpin <package_name>` or `opam
pin remove <package_name>`.

For other options, the command is well described in [the official
documentation](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Usage.html#opam-pin).

#### Upgrading packages

To upgrade the installed packages to the latest version, run:

```bash
opam upgrade <package_name>
```

`opam upgrade` is also able to upgrade *all* the packages of the local switch if
no package name is given.

There is one big difference compared to npm: opam stores a local copy of the
opam repository, like `apt-get` does in Debian. So we often want to update this
copy before requesting an upgrade:

```bash
opam update && opam upgrade <package_name>
```

#### Dev dependencies

You can use the [`with-dev-setup`
field](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html#pkgvar-with-dev-setup) to define
dependencies that are only required at development time. For example:

```
depends: [
  "ocamlformat" {with-dev-setup}
]
```

This has to be combined with the `--with-dev-setup` flag when installing
dependencies, e.g. `opam install --deps-only --with-dev-setup`.

#### Lock files

Lock files are also not common yet in the opam world, but they can be used as
follows:

- Using `opam lock` to generate the lock file when needed (basically after each
  `opam install` or `opam upgrade`).
- Adding `--locked` to all the `opam install --deps-only` and `opam switch
  create .` commands.


#### Bindings and package management

When writing Melange libraries that bind to existing JavaScript packages, the
users of the Melange library will have to make sure to install those JavaScript
packages manually.

This is similar to how OCaml bindings to system libraries work, see examples
like
[`ocaml-mariadb`](https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-mariadb/blob/9db2e4d8dec7c584213d0e0f03d079a36a35d9d5/README.md?plain=1#L18-L20)
or
[`ocurl`](https://github.com/ygrek/ocurl/blob/f0c6f47d6f3d25282648439dc4ade5810a993710/README.md?plain=1#L16).

The advantage of this approach —as opposed to vendoring the JavaScript packages
inside the bindings— is that it gives users of the bindings complete flexibility
over the way these JavaScript packages are downloaded and bundled.

## Build system

_TODO: Explain compilation model (1:1 ml/js), intro to dune._

## Communicate with JavaScript

_TODO: Sections will be something like:_
```
- intro: explain attributes, extensions, and `bs.` backwards compatibility
- `melange.ppx` preprocessor and extensions
- data types
- call javascript from melange:
  - intro to external (link to OCaml docs)
  - bindings with external (to functions, objects or other values)
  - global values
- call melange from javascript
```

## Additions to OCaml
_TODO: pipe first_

## Melange for X users

_TODO: For ReScript users, for OCaml users, for TypeScript/JavaScript users._
